on a mountaintop, above the top, which is very modern.
The outer walls of the house are almost completely glass, completely window around the house.
So it's hard to tell exactly where the inside ends and where the outside begins.
It's really a love poem.
Ending is a sense of trepidation that is not going to last, although this was written about 10 years after Elizabeth moved to Brazil.
A song for the rainy season.
Hidden, oh, hidden in the high fog
the house we live in, beneath the magnetic rock, rain, rainbow-ridden, where blood-black bromelias, lichens, owls, and the lint of the waterfalls cling, familiar, unbidden.
In a dim age of water,
Brooke sings loud from a ribcage of giant fern.
Vapor climbs up the thick growth effortlessly, turns back, holding them both, house and rock, in a private cloud.
At night on the roof, blind drops crawl, and the ordinary brown owl gives us proof he can count.
Five times, always five, he stands and takes off after the fat frogs that shrilling for love, clamber and mount.
House, open house, to the white dew and the milk-white sunrise kind to the eyes, to membership of silverfish, mouse, bookworms,
big moths with a wall for the mildew's ignorant map.
Darkened and tarnished by the warm touch of the warm breath, maculate, cherished.
Rejoice, for a later era will differ, oh difference that kills
shadowy light.
Without water, the great rock will stare, unmagnetized, bare, no longer wearing rainbows or rain, the forgiving air and the high fog gone.
The owls will move on, and the several waterfalls shrivel in the steady sun.
This letter Elizabeth wrote to Robert Lowell from Oro Preto.
She had just won the National Book Award for her complete poems.
Since there was no phone in her house, she had actually been in the post office trying to call Robert Giroux when his call came through telling her the news that she had won.
She immediately called Robert Roll and asked him to accept the award for her.
The letter is dated March 5, 1970.
In September of that year, she'd be moving to Cambridge to teach at Harvard.
I hope this reaches you before you take off for Italy.
Such excitement here about the National Book Awards.
It was rather nice.
Many wires from Bob.
All weirdly mid-fell by the time they got here.
And then when I called him, we seemed to meet in mid-Atlantic.
He was calling me at the very same minute.
I really wanted to go to New York, but it would have been an awful rush.
Barely 24 hours to get ready and get from here to Rio.
No cold weather clothes at all.
and then the expense, even if Farrar Strauss and Giroux pay the airplane ticket.
But I would have loved seeing you and other friends.
I have never attended one of those functions and can't imagine what they are like.
I remember reading parts of the speech by Updike, however, and feared that a speech might be expected.
I heard my cable, Bob's suggestion, reached you
served the purpose and wasn't an awful nuisance to you.
It seems to me you are always doing things for me that I should somehow be able to do for myself, and I am really profoundly grateful.
I thought of several other cables.
One was, about time.
Not that I attended.
It seemed like an occasion when one should be quite square, so I hope it was all right.
My stop at the post office, telephone company, and I gather the U.S.
Embassy here, has gone way up.
How I would love to have heard the judges' conversation, Rex Roth and Eugene McCarthy especially.
Well, I am sure I owe it all to you, and thank you.
as well as for the holding hand at the announcement ceremony, if you were able to be there.
These things make such a big impression on the ignorant.
Like here, it is nice.
Just made a birthday cake for the maid, who is 18 today, Eva.
I've never known so many Adams and Eves.
They seem to be the favorite names here.
This girl and her younger sister have really made life much more bearable, clean and quiet.
Now they'll only stay a while.
The mother, they are two of 13, comes to the door every day or so, and they go through a little ritual.
Bless me, mother.
God bless you, my daughter.
And so on.
Strange little children in the street say it to me, and I feel rather foolish.
God bless thee, my child.
The weather has been absolutely heavenly.
Such clouds, rainbows, pink rainstorms with bright green hills showing through, churches coming and going through the rain, or wrapped in pale green cocoons of mist.
Oh dear, I am of two minds about selling.
If only things were a bit different.
We have had such a nice young man visiting, too, a former Peace Corps boy from Chattanooga.
Old Episcopalian family, one brother a minister, et cetera, went to Harvard, where his mother thought he would become depraved.
He bought a big old fazenda with a friend and worked it.
A long story he didn't go into, but the friend committed suicide.
And now this boy's legal problems are very much like mine, only a great deal worse.
Perhaps that has cheered me up more, too.
I didn't think anyone could be worse than mine.
He hung pictures, cleaned the gramophone, sorted all the records, knew about electricity and plumbing, and he's coming back, I'm glad to say.
I just learned today that Rocco, too, had committed suicide.
I don't know anything about him, except that he came from someplace along the Washington coast.
That's where he got a lot of those beautiful colors.
Oh, why?
I wonder.
Heavens, what a veil of tears it is.
And the last one.
Pink Dog.
It's the last poem Elizabeth completed, though she'd begun it years before when she first started to think about leaving Brazil.
It's a kind of ironic samba that combines two of her favorite genres, the poem in which she gives advice and the poem in which she identifies with an animal.
In a footnote,
She explained that Fantasia is a carnival costume and Mascara is a mask.
Pink Dog, Rio de Janeiro.
The sun is blazing and the sky is blue.
Umbrellas close the beach in every hue.
Naked, you trot across the avenue.
Oh, never have I seen a dog so bare, naked and pink, without a single hair.
Startled, the passersby draw back and stare.
Of course, they're mortally afraid of rabies.
You are not mad.
You have a case of scabies.
But look intelligent.
Where are your babies?
a nursing mother by those hanging teats.
In what slums have you hidden them, poor bitch, while you go begging, living by your wits?
Didn't you know?
It's been in all the papers to solve this problem, how they deal with beggars.
They take and throw them in the tidal rivers.
Yet, idiots, paralytics, parasites,
go bobbing in the ebbing sewage, nights out in the suburbs where there are no lights.
If they do this to anyone who begs, drunk or sober, with or without legs, what would they do to stick more like your dogs in the cafes,
And on the sidewalk corners, the joke is going round that all the beggars who can afford them now wear life preservers.
In your condition, you would not be able even to float, much less to dog paddle.
Now look, the practical, the sensible solution is to wear a fantasia.
Tonight, you simply can't afford to be an eyeball.
But no one will ever see a dog in Moscow this time of year.
Ash Wednesday will come.
But a carnival is here.
What sambas can you dance?
What will you wear?
They say that carnival is degenerating.
Radios, Americans, or something have ruined it completely.
They're just talking.
Carnival is always wonderful.
A deflated dog would not look well.
Dress up.
Dress up and dance at carnival.
We've heard a lot about Steve.
but there's another side to Bishop in the portable rather.
I was reflecting as I was sitting here on the beauty of proper names by contrast to nicknames.
Wouldn't it be awful if we were calling her Lizzie Bishop or Beth Bishop or something, Elizabeth Bishop.
The poet is
Often I think Bishop was crucified between journalism and the academic life.
Somewhere in between.
Bishop agreed for money to do a book on Brazil in the Time Life series of books about different countries.
She regretted it before she had finished.
Because Time kept trying to make her over, naturally.
And they wanted her to write in the Time style.
Along with the rest of the mail was a contract with life from my agent.
Oh, oh, oh, I don't know what to think or say or do, except that I guess I've already done it, except that I'm having a hideous time writing the thing.
But once I made the bargain, I suppose the thing to do is just write as fast as possible and try not to think about it.
No use for slow bass.
Though I can't think it's too close any other way, because they'll just put it through their own meat grinder lawfully, and it will stop sounding like that no matter what I say.
My agents did their best, but all that amounts to is that I at least have the right to fight with them.
I only hope it's going to be worth the $9,000 I'll get out of it.
Doesn't look as if it worked to me so far.
And the worst is really that, like the publishers,
Sorry, the worst is really that life publishers, they keep paying lip service to distinguished writing, your own opinion, your fine reputation of blah, blah, blah, lying like drugs.
It was really a weird process, and now I know that others have before me.
I must tell you, the life editor wrote me that
You'd be surprised how much help an outline is.
Although it may seem like a burden, a bibliography of the books I'm moving, would be a good idea to teach our grandmother to suck.
They are incredible, that's all.
It's really more like manufacturing synthetic-equipped cream under the byproducts of a plastic factory than anything remotely connected with writing, even journalistic writing.
I put on one display a temperament and the energy had been running around, all fluttering and consoling.
The awful thing is I feel so sorry for him with his great grace and thanks a million.
They also tell us from New York to ask if I've ever been a communist.
Probably some infant editor saw a poem in a partisan review and the name terrified me.
On the whole, they behave exactly the way the U.S.
Embassy does here.
Then there's also the academic world.
for a tiny little anecdote from her classes, which is typical of what she might write about her classes.
Speaking of George Herbert, I wanted my writing class to read Love Unknown, one of my favorite poems of his, the certain points I was trying to make, and being lazy, I asked my dear John Peach to read it aloud, out of an old edition Cale gave me.
He didn't know about the old English long S, it looks like an F, being used in a set of S,
So he began.
Dear friend, sit down.
The chair was long and fat.
We all started laughing.
Oh boy, he just couldn't be this, so I had to do it myself.
And then I want to read the last letter.
This was to John Frederick Rims, the poet and anthology, and he had put her in an anthology, only the anthology has footnotes.
This is driving her crazy, all the little bubbles that go down the page and little distractions from the poem.
I'm going to take issue with you, she wrote this the day she died, I'm going to take issue with you rather violently about the idea of footnotes.
With one or two exceptions, I'll mention them later, I don't think there should be any footnotes.
You said the book is for college students, and I think anyone who gets as far as college will be able to use the dictionary.
If a book catches a student's interest at all, he or she should damn well be able to look up an unfamiliar word in the dictionary.
I know they don't, or most of them don't, but they should be made to somehow.
The earlier English forms you are using, of course, may require some help, but mine certainly doesn't.
I can glance it in the dictionary, so is Gow, G-U-N-W-A-L-E, and so is Dwarfs.
These three words occur in the fish.
One of my few exceptions is the S.O.
Exxon note to filling station, because I'm not sure how long ago now that happened, but a good many years.
Although I let students figure out, in fact, I tell them in a poem that can't have arranged to say so, so, so, et cetera, as so, so, so, so.
I don't think that has to be explained.
However, most of them might well not know that so, so, so was, perhaps still is in some places, the phrase people use to soothe and calm horses.
I don't think too many people do know that.
All flower names can be looked up, certainly.
Some students even see flowers still.
Though I know only too well the TV has weakened the sense of reality, and so very few students see anything the way it was in real life.
You see what a nasty teacher I must see, but I do think students get lazier and lazier in the fact they have everything done for them.
But I suggest buying a small paperback, almost the whole class wise,
Where can I find it?
My best example of this sort of thing is what one rather bright, hard and honest student told me.
She told her roommate or a friend, who had obviously taken my words writing course, that she was doing her paper with me and the friend said, oh, don't work with her, it's awful.
She wants you to look words up in the dictionary.
It isn't creative at all.
In other words, that is not enough what you're writing or reading.
Perhaps my class at MIT has embittered me.
But some of NYU and some of the Harvard classes, though there have been good students and a few wonderful ones from time to time, that they mostly seem to think that poetry, to read or to write, is a snap one just has to feel underline.
And not for very long, either.
Well, I could go on and on, but I won't.
Two or three years ago, I was talking away about the quake at Graveyard, and when I asked a question, the whole class responded in chorus, with what I discovered was, I was reading my own book, what I discovered was the footnotes from the Norton Anthology.
I'm right in that case, but again, if I'm wrong, we finally all got to laughing, but that was an unusually bright class.
Of course, I'm writing this just about my own inclusion, and the moose may well be too long,
Of course, there are many historically early poems I perceive the necessity of the notes for.
If the moose is too long, I suggest another from Geography 3, any you like.
I do hope I haven't offended you now, but I think the teaching of literature is deplorable now, and if you could get students to reading, underline, you would have done a noble work, affectionately.
I suppose I simply want to read a little sonnet that Elizabeth wrote, a little upside-down sonnet.
As most of you know, instead of eight and six, it's six and eight.
And each of the two parts are introduced by a past participle.
The first little sestet part introduced by the past participle caught while the soul was still in the body.
And the octave, the last part, introduced by the word freeze after the soul had been released from the body.
But it's a little dimitrish on it, a little thin thing.
Caught, the bubbles in the spirit level,
a creature divided, and the compass needle wobbling and wavering, unsighted.
Freed, the broken, the momentous Mercury running away, and the rainbow bird from the narrow bevel of the empty mirror flying wherever it feels like, hey.
Wow.
just read an extract from a prose poem and an extract from a letter and a poem.
I once said in a lecture that there was something Cordelia-like about the music of Frank Lloyd.
There's certainly plenty of chatter in the letters.
I have to revise that a little bit.
But I meant that kind of reticence that was, that's
But there's also in her, as a writer, something which she describes in a phrase in the story, In the Village, an immense, sibilant, glistening loneliness.
And there's a prose poem called Giant Snail, which has both the containment and the sibilant, glistening loneliness in it.
And I just read the conclusion of that.
My sides move in rhythmic waves just off the ground, from front to back.
The wake of a ship, wax white water, or a slowly melting flow.
I am cold, cold, cold as ice.
My blind white bull's head was a cretin's scare head.
Degenerate, my four horns that can't attack.
The sides of my mouth are now my hands.
They press the earth and suck it hard.
Ah, but I know my shell is beautiful and high and glazed and shining.
I know it well, although I have not seen it.
Its curled white lip is of the finest enamel.
Inside it is as smooth as silk, and I, I fill it to perfection.
My wide wake shines now that it's going dark.
I leave a lovely opalescent ribbon.
I know this.
But oh, I'm too big.
I feel it.
Pity me.
If and when I reach the rock, I shall go into a certain crack there for the night.
The waterfall below will vibrate through my shell and body all night long.
In that steady pulsing, I can rest.
All night, I shall be like a sleeping ear.
I think when we read the vision, certainly when I read some of her poems, I'm always tempted to revise Keats, who said, remember, darkling, I listen.
It's always about vision for me, if you want to say, brightling, I hear.
and the language.
And just to say something about the letters, I think this is what's so deeply satisfying about the letters.
In the letter she does what the poet Cheslaw Miłosz says, that the poet is unearthed to do.
Line by line, phrase by phrase, detail by detail, one thing is noticed and recorded after another.
So what she does spontaneously is, in Miłosz's words,
glorify things just because they are.
I think her letters endorse the value of a life of sensations and of thoughts, a life of gossip and cooking, poetry and particularity.
And I think amid the slippages of the post-modern, you might say, and the insecurities we're supposed
in the intellectual life.
These letters and poems are a real reminder of the value of the, as it were, pre-literate world, a world that's still there for all of us, and still reachable.
If only we had the kind of commitment, and this is a wonderful kind of example of civilization in these letters, the commitment to value, the minute particular, and to connect ourselves to it.
I want to read one of the many bishop poems that connect me to my own pre-literate life, to a word where there used to be cock fights at Easter, roosters in the yard, and indeed religious ceremonies during Holy Week, where I read about St.
Peter.
The poem is Rooster's, and it's one of the great anti-patriarchy poems, written in 1940, anti-militarist, anti-feminist poem, I want to wear better you might say.
Very conscious, very crafted, a poem that marked her coming of age as an artist.
And in her famous letter, by now famous because it was so well used by David Goldstone in his book,
She comes away from Marianne Moore's tutelage and decides that she will write the poem her own way.
This is the letter in which she defends her poem.
What I'm about to say, I'm afraid, will sound like Elizabeth knows Beth.
I feel, let me see, I can't seem to bring myself to give up the set form.
which I'm afraid you think fills the poem with redundancies, etc.
I feel that the rather rattle-trap rhythm is appropriate.
Maybe I can explain it.
I cherish my water closet and the other sordidities because I want to emphasize the essential baseness of militarism.
In the first part I was thinking of Key West, but also, this is 1940, also of those aerial views of dismal little towns in Finland and Norway
when the Germans took over in their atmosphere of poverty.
That's why, although I see what you mean, I want to keep tin rooster instead of gold and not use assiduous beds.
And for the same reason, I want to keep the title of the rather contemptuous word, roosters, instead of the more classical, the cock.
And I want to repeat gunmetal.
I also had in mind the violent roosters Picasso did in connection with the Guernica picture.
About the glass-headed pins, I feel the roosters to be placed here and there by their various crowings, like the pins that point out war projects on a map.
Maybe I haven't made it clear enough.
And I want to keep to see the end.
That's what Peter, in the gospel story, he stays to see the end.
I want to keep to see the end in quotes because, although it may not be generally recognized, I have always felt the expression used
At four o'clock, in the gunmetal blue dark, we hear the first crow of the first cock, just below the gunmetal blue window.
And immediately there is an echo off in the distance, then one from the backyard fence, then one
Horrible insistence grates like a wet match from the broccoli patch, flares, and all of our town begins to catch.
Cries galore from the water-crossed door, from the dropping plastered henhouse floor, where in the blue blur their rustling wives admire, the roosters brace their cruel feet and glare with stupid eyes, while from their beaks there rise the uncontrolled traditional cries.
Deep from protruding chests In green gold medals dressed Planned to command and terrorize the rest The many wives who lead hen's lives Are being quoted and despised Deep from raw throats A senseless order floats all over town A rooster floats over our beds From rusty iron sheds And fences made from old bedsteads Over our churches Where the tinny rooster perches
over our little wooden northern houses, making sallies from all the muddy alleys, marking out maps like Rand McNally, glass-headed pins, oil golds, and copper greens, anthracite blues, Alisa rings, each one an act of displacement in perspective, each screaming, this is where I live, each screaming, get up, stop dreaming, boosters,
What are you projecting?
You whom the Greeks elect to shoot at on a post, who struggled when sacrificed, you whom they labeled very combative.
What right of you to give commands and tell us how to live?
Cry here and here and wake us here where our unwanted love, conceit and war.
The crown of red set on your little head is charged with all your fighting blood.
Yes, that excrescence mixed amongst virile presence, plus all that vulgar beauty of iridescence.
Now in mid-air, by Tuesday, fight each other.
Down comes a first flame feather, and one is flying with raging heroism, defying even the sensation of dying.
And one has fallen.
is flung on the gray ash heap, lies in dung with his dead wives, with open, bloody eyes when those metallic feathers oxidize.
St.
Peter's sin was worse than that of Magdalene, whose sins were not the flesh alone of still Peter's, falling beneath the flares among the servants of the office.
Old holy sculpture could set it all together in one small scene, past and future.
Christ stands amazed.
Peter, two fingers raised to surprise lips, both as if days.
But in between, a little cockpit scene, carved on a dim column in the travertine, explained by gallows cannet, fled petrood underneath it.
There is inescapable hope, the pill, yes.
And there, Peter's tears, rung-dung on earth, dancing to your sides, and gems spurs.
Tear, encrusted thick as a medieval relic, he waits.
Go, Peter, heart-sick, still cannot guess those cock-a-doodles yet my dress.
His dreadful booster come to mean forgiveness.
A new weather vane on basilica and barns,
and that outside the lantern there would always be a bronze cock on a porphyry pillar, so the people and the Pope might see that even the prince of the apostles long since had been forgiven, and to convince all the assembly that deny, deny, deny is not all the rooster's cry.
In the morning, a little light was floating in the backyard,
and gilding from underneath the broccoli, leaf by leaf, hardly the might have come to grief.
Gliding through gilding the tiny floating swallows' belly and lines of pink cloud in the sky, the days preamble like wandering lines in marble.
The cocks are now almost inaudible.
The sun climbs in, following to see the end, faithful ad enemy,
We're going to close the proceedings with
The art of losing isn't hard to master.
So many things seem filled with the intent to be lost that their loss is no disaster.
Lose something every day, except the cluster of lost door keys, the hour badly spent.
The art of losing isn't hard to master.
Then practice losing farther, losing faster, places and names, and where it was you meant to travel.
None of these will bring disaster.
I lost my mother's watch.
And look, my last or next to last of three loved houses went.
The art of losing is important to master.
I lost two cities, lovely ones, and vast as some realms.
I owned two rivers, a continent.
I missed them, but it wasn't a disaster.
Even losing you, the joking voice,
It's evident the art of losing is not too hard to master, and what may look like riot, not disaster.
Bye.